Rates of diabetes are reaching epidemic levels. The key problem in both type 1 and type 2 diabetes is dysfunctional insulin signaling, either due to lack of production or due to impaired insulin sensitivity. A key feature of diabetic retinopathy in animal models is degenerate capillary formation. The goal of this present study was to investigate a potential mechanism for retinal endothelial cell apoptosis in response to hyperglycemia. The hypothesis was that hyperglycemia-induced TNFα leads to retinal endothelial cell apoptosis through inhibition of insulin signaling. To test the hypothesis, primary human retinal endothelial cells were grown in normal glucose (5 mM) or high glucose (25 mM) and treated with exogenous TNFα, TNFα siRNA or suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3) siRNA. Cell lysates were processed for Western blotting and ELISA analyses to verify TNFα and SOCS3 knockdown, as well as key pro- and anti-apoptotic factors, IRS-1, and Akt. Data indicate that high glucose culturing conditions significantly increase TNFα and SOCS3 protein levels. Knockdown of TNFα and SOCS3 significantly increases anti-apoptotic proteins, while decreasing pro-apoptotic proteins. Knockdown of TNFα leads to decreased phosphorylation of IRS-1 Ser307 , which would promote normal insulin signaling. Knockdown of SOCS3 increased total IRS-1 levels, as well as decreased IR Tyr960 , both of which would inhibit retinal endothelial cell apoptosis through increased insulin signaling. Taken together, our findings suggest that increased TNFα inhibits insulin signaling in 2 ways: 1) increased phosphorylation of IRS-1 Ser307 , 2) increased SOCS3 levels to decrease total IRS-1 and increase IR Tyr960 , both of which block normal insulin signal transduction. Resolution of the hyperglycemia-induced TNFα levels in retinal endothelial cells may prevent apoptosis through disinhibition of insulin receptor signaling.
Based upon on our hypothesis, increased TNFα levels observed in response to high glucose should increase SOCS3 levels, such that either TNFα or high glucose treatment leads to the increased SOCS3 protein levels observed in  Fig. 1A  (* P <0.05 vs. NG not-treated), which is eliminated when cells are treated with TNFα siRNA ( Fig. 1C , # P <0.05 vs. HG NT). SOCS3 has been reported to lead to increased phosphorylation of insulin receptor on tyrosine 960, which eliminates insulin receptor/IRS-1 binding in hepatoma cells [ 28 ]; therefore one would expect increased SOCS3 levels and increased phosphorylation of insulin receptor on tyrosine 960 compared to untreated high glucose treated retinal endothelial cells. This response should be eliminated when TNFα siRNA is applied to REC cultured in high glucose, suggesting this is a TNFα-mediated event. Indeed, treatment with TNFα increased IR Tyr960  phosphorylation, which was reduced when TNFα is knocked down ( Fig. 1D , # P <0.05 vs. HG scsiRNA).
While increased SOCS3/IR Tyr960  is one pathway by which TNFα may induce insulin resistance and REC apoptosis [ 28 ], TNFα can also increase serine 307 phosphorylation on IRS-1 to insulin receptor signaling, eliminating Akt activation [ 20 ]. Data in the REC treated with high glucose and TNFα show increased IRS-1 Ser307  ( Fig. 2 , * P <0.05 vs. NG NT), while cells treated with TNFα siRNA have significantly reduced IRS-1 Ser307  levels ( Fig. 2 , # P <0.05 vs. HG NT and HG TNFα).
Since both increased IRS-1 Ser307  or increased SOCS3/IR Tyr960  levels can induce insulin resistance, leading to cell death, we measured cell death proteins (caspase 3, cytochrome c, Bax) and cell survival proteins (Akt, Bcl-xL) in REC treated in normal and high glucose alone and following TNFα siRNA application. Analyses of all key cell death/survival proteins suggest that knockdown of TNFα can eliminate the effects of hyperglycemia on REC ( Fig. 3 ).
Since hyperglycemic culturing conditions increased TNFα to increase SOCS3, we used SOCS3 siRNA to determine whether SOCS3 is directly involved in the changes in total IRS-1 (leading to degradation) or insulin receptor phosphorylation on tyrosine 960 (inhibiting insulin receptor/IRS-1 binding). Data indicate that knockdown of SOCS3 leads to a significant increase in total IRS-1 levels ( Fig. 5 , # P <0.05 vs. HG scsiRNA treated REC), suggesting that SOCS3 directly regulates IRS-1 levels in REC cultured in high glucose. This is further supported by data in REC cultured in high glucose treated with SOCS3 siRNA and probed for IR Tyr960  (inhibitory site to IR/IRS-1 binding). In high glucose conditions, IR Tyr960  is increased, which would decrease insulin receptor/IRS-1 binding ( Fig. 6  * P <0.05 vs. NG) but it is inhibited after SOCS3 siRNA application ( Fig. 6 , # P <0.05 vs. HG only), suggesting that SOCS3 does inhibit IR/IRS-1 binding activities.
While TNFα can directly inhibit insulin signaling through its phosphorylation of IRS-1 Ser307 , it also can activate the SOCS proteins [ 30 ], which can also block insulin signaling. In our work, we show that high glucose leads to increased SOCS3 levels in retinal endothelial cells. Activation of SOCS3 can lead to insulin resistance in 2 separate ways: increased insulin receptor phosphorylation on tyrosine 960 [ 42 ] or through IRS-1 degradation by proteasomes [ 29 ]. In these experiments with knockdown of SOCS3, we found that SOCS3 likely inhibits insulin signaling in both ways in retinal endothelial cells, as we found decreased IR Tyr960  phosphorylation and increased total IRS-1 levels following SOCS3 siRNA application. Taken together, these data suggest that hyperglycemia-induced TNFα increases SOCS3 levels and actions in human retinal endothelial cells, which likely contributes to increased insulin resistance and endothelial cell death.
